---
title: Version 0.4.4 released
date: 2017-07-09 21:03:00
---

Oh boy, it's another Urn update! I know, I can hardly supress my excitment. There's been almost 50 commits since the
last release, and a whole host of features inside those commits. So let's get started.

## Goodbye `setf!`, hello lenses!
A while ago we [introduced the collections library][collections] and the joy that is lenses. I won't re-iterate what is
said there, but in essence it provides a powerful and composable way to query and update objects (as well as making
immutable copies of them). We've merged this feature into the main standard library, replacing the rather hacky `setf!`.

## String interpolation
If you need to concatinate a load of strings together, there aren't many nice ways. Sure, format strings help a bit but
there is nothing quite as great as string interpolation! Prefixing a string with the dollar (`$`) sign (or calling the
`$` macro) allows you to embed variables directly in code:

```cl
> (let [(foo "some string")
.      (bar '(1 2 3))]
. $"Interpolating ${foo} and ~{bar}")

"Interpolating some string (1 2 3)"
```

Currently Urn's implementation is very basic, just allowing variables (it's implemented as a macro after all), but we've
plans to extend it.

## More code-generation improvements
Every release I witter on about the various code generation improvements we've made, and this time is no exception. I've
been running the generated code through [luacheck][luacheck] to try to find some places where we're generating pretty
poor Lua code. We've made a lot of progress in this area, cutting the number of warnings from 469 to 104 (which equates
to a warning on 1.2% of lines).

This isn't just a meaningless statistic though - the end result means more compact and "readable" code. Thanks to
various enhancements, we've cut 300 lines from the previous release.

[collections]: https://squiddev.github.io/urn/2017/04/08/version-0.2.9.html
[luacheck]: https://github.com/mpeterv/luacheck/ luacheck, a linter for Lua.
