---
title: Version 0.6.1 released
date: 2017-11-25 16:35:00
---

Normally I start these update posts with some comment about how much has changed, or how long it's been since the last
one. Sadly, I can't think of anything to say so let's just jump right into some key changes:

## Method improvements
Methods are a really powerful way of writing functions which can handle all sorts of data types. That being said, they
are not without their problems and so we're always working to improve them. One issue is the large increase in code size
that using methods results in. In Urn 0.6.1, we've tried to lower that overhead, resulting in even smaller files!

Alongside with that, we've also added the ability to specify wrappers within methods. Every call to your method will go
through this delegate, allowing one to provide specialist logic. This is used by the `eq?` method to check using the
`==` operator before trying anything else.

```cl
(defgeneric eq? (x y)
  "Compare values for equality deeply."
  :delegate (lambda (x y)
              (if (= x y)
                true
                (myself x y))))
```

## Code generation and optimisation tweaks
Interestingly enough, method delegates exposed several places where code generation could be further improved. One such
improvement was forcing bindings to be generated as `local` definitions rather than directly called functions. This
makes code more readable and potentially allows further improvements as statements can be emitted more sensibly. For
instance, consider the following code:

```cl
(print!
  (with (foo (if (empty? '()) 1 2))
    (+ 1 foo)))
```

here's how it would be compiled on 0.6.0:

```lua
return print1(1 + (function(foo)
        return foo
end)((function()
        if empty_3f_1({tag="list", n=0}) then
                return 1
        else
                return 2
        end
end)()))
```

and here's the equivalent code on 0.6.1:

```lua
return print1(1 + (function()
        local foo
        if empty_3f_1({tag="list", n=0}) then
                foo = 1
        else
                foo = 2
        end
        return foo
end)())
```

Another interesting optimisation we now apply is lowering "deferrable" variables. For instance, consider this
definition:

```cl
(with (foo '())
  (when (empty? '())
    (debug foo)))
```

The definition of `foo` is only needed if then `when` block is executed, and so we're able to "push" the definition
down:

```cl
(when (empty? '())
  (with (foo '())
    (debug foo)))
```

Whilst this code doesn't appear much in practice (or at least in this overly simplistic form), it's nice to catch the
few occasions where it does.
