---
title: Version 0.2.1 released
date: 2017-03-10 00:07:13
---

It's friday, it's five to five and it's ~~Crackerjack~~ Urn update time. Well, only one of those are true but you
should still be excited. There are a couple of exciting things in this update, so let's get cracking.

## Top-level unquote

If you've been [following the tutorials]("https://squiddev.github.io/urn/tutorial/04-macros.html#quoting") you'll recall
that `syntax-quote` and `unquote` allow you to step up and down the "compilation ladder", `syntax-quote` moving from
code to data and `unquote` moving back up to code. With this update, you can `unquote` even further up the ladder,
allowing you to execute arbitrary code at compile time without the use of macros.

For example, say you want to have a list of the first 10 square numbers. Previously, you could define it as

```cl
(define squares (map (cut ^ <> 2) (range 1 10)))
```

However, this means it'll be executed every time you run your program. This could slow it down. Instead, let's generate
these at compile time:

```cl
(define squares ,(cons `list (map (cut ^ <> 2) (range 1 10))))
```

This compiles to

```cl
(define squares (list 1 4 9 16 25 36 49 64 81 100))
```

Of course, there are far more powerful applications of this which we won't go into here.

## Property checking
Property checking is a form of testing where you can write some form of assertion and it will generate random inputs, trying to break it. For instance:

```cl
(check [(list x)]
  (eq? x (reverse (reverse x))))
```

Will check if reversing a list twice always results in the same list. This means you can write general assertions for
all inputs, rather than specific test cases. For more
information, [see the documentation]("https://squiddev.github.io/urn/docs/lib.extra.check.html").

## Lambda-binding syntax
`let` and friends (`let*`, `letrec`, etc...) now allow creating functions just by specifying the arguments and function
body - no lambda required!

```cl
(letrec [(factorial (x accum)
           (if (= x 0)
             accum
             (factorial (- x 1) (* accum x))))]
  (print! (factorial 3 1)))
```
